# References text

## Internet

**Name of the source**
Text
(Topic)

**[forex.com](www.forex.com)**
[Source](https://www.forex.com/en-uk/education/resources-by-level/beginner/charting-basics-bars-vs-candlesticks/)
Bearish candles are typically red. It means the opening price was higher than
the closing price for the specified time interval. Bullish candles are
typically green. It means the opening price was lower than the closing price
for the specified time interval.
(Candlesticks)

**[forex.com](www.forex.com)**
[Source](https://www.forex.com/en-uk/education/resources-by-level/beginner/charting-basics-bars-vs-candlesticks/)
Bearish bars are typically red. It means the opening price was higher than the
closing price for the specified time interval. Bullish bars are typically
green. It means the opening price was lower than the closing price for the
specified time interval.
(Bars)

**[forex.com](www.forex.com)**
[Source](https://www.forex.com/en-uk/education/resources-by-level/beginner/what-is-fundamental-analysis/)
Fundamental Analysis is a broad term that describes the act of trading based
purely on global aspects that influence supply and demand of currencies,
commodities, and equities. There are a variaty of sources to base the opinion
such as central banks, economic realeases, geopolitical tensions, weather,
seasonality, among others.
(Fundamental analysis)

**[forex.com](www.forex.com)**
[Source](https://www.forex.com/en-uk/education/resources-by-level/beginner/understanding-technical-analysis/)
Technical analysis is the study of historical price action in order to identify
patterns and determine probabilities of future movements in the market through
the use of technical studies, indicators, and other analysis tools.
Technical analysis boils down to two things: identifying trend or identifying
support/resistance through the use of price charts and/or timeframes.
Markets can only do three things: move up, down, or sideways. Prices typically
move in a zigzag fashion, and as a result, price action has only two states:
"Range" - when prices zigzag sideways, and "Trend" - prices either zigzag
higher (up trend, or bull trend), or prices zigzag lower (down trend, or bear
trend)
(Technical analysis)

# Papers

**Microstructure of Foreign Exchange Markets**
Microstructure models, by contrast, examine how information relevant to the
trading decisions of market participants becomes embedded in the prices of FX
instruments via the trading process. According to this perspective, trading is
not an ancillary market activity that can be ignored when considering how the
prices of FX instruments behave. Rather, trading is an integral part of the
process through which the prices of FX instruments are determined and evolve
through time.
(Microstructure models)

Over time trading in the FX market has involved several different types of
participants. The FX dealers working at major banks have always been the
central intermediaries. More specifically, they play the role of liquidity
suppliers who are willing to be the counter-parties to trades initiated by
others. End-users comprise the other principal type of participant. This group
comprises the financial and non-financial customers of dealer-banks, as well as
other (non-dealer) entities that trade on electronic systems. Trading by
financial end-users is generated by allocative, speculative and risk management
motives. Trading by non-financial end-users is generated by goods trade,
cross-border investment and risk management.
(Forex participants)

Although the spot FX market is often cited as the world’s largest financial
market, one characterized by huge trading volumes and very high liquidity, this
characterization overlooks the substantial differences in trading volume and
liquidity across different currency pairs. Investors wanting to exchange some
currency pairs face significant trading costs, particularly for large trades.
(non-liquid pairs)

**Intraday spot foreign exchange market**
The market efficiency characterizes how fast and precise those news are
reflected in the exchange rate on the market. Virtually, any financial asset
can be bought or sold within seconds during trading sessions. Foreign Exchange
market with its 24 hours trading, is considered to be the most liquid of all
financial markets. Liquidity influences the attractiveness of an investment and
the market efficiency. Finally, the volatility of financial markets is a
headache for corporate managers and the source of gain for speculators. It
differs greatly between sectors and geographical regions.
(Market efficiency, liquidity and volatility)

Market efficiency is defined by how fast and how accurately all the relevant
information is absorbed by the market, in particular in the price and the
traded volume.
(Market efficiency)

Semi-strong market efficiency form claims that all public information is
incorporated in prices, which exclude any privately known information. In other
words, if a market is proved to be efficient in semi-strong form, neither
fundamental nor technical analysis can consistently produce abnormal returns.
(Semi-strong market efficiency)

The weak form of market efficiency states that all past prices are reflected in
the today's price on the market. This basically means that is it not possible
to get any significant advantage on the market by analyzing past prices only,
as it is done in the case of technical analysis. However, fundamental analysis
can be successfully applied.
(Weak market efficiency)

Tools used to test market efficiency are dependent on the form of efficiency to
be tested. Weak form may be detected using unit root tests. Semi-strong form is
analyzed using cointegration, Granger causality and variance decomposition
analysis.
(Tools to test market efficiency)

Market liquidity characterizes how easy and fast the assets can be exchanged,
moved, bought or sold, without effecting price and incurring significant costs.
(Market liquidity)

Volatility is traditionally measured using basic statistical tools, like
variance and standard deviation. According to Mandelbrot (Mandelbrot, Hudson,
2004, p. 48), this measure only reflects one part of the real market risk,
"benign risk". The remaining "wild risk" is often neglected by researches,
unless they use stable Pareto distributions. An alternative measure of
volatility could be the number of price ticks arriving per unit of time
– useful information for speculators.
(Volatility measurement)

**Intraday return inefficiency and long memory in the volatilities of forex**
Market efficiency refers to the speed, precision, and accuracy with which
markets absorb and reflect all available information, including that related to
trading volume of single and multiple assets.
(Market efficiency)

In specific, the weak form efficient market hypothesis postulates that it is
meaningless to forecast future asset values based on historical prices as all
that information is reflected in the current asset price. The semi-strong
efficient market hypothesis states that both, historical and all publicly
available information, are reflected by current security prices, making it
impossible to outperform the market portfolio (e.g., an index tracking
portfolio) using any piece of financial or economic information disclosed.
Fundamental analysis is consequently worthless. The strong efficient market
hypothesis states that aside from historical and publicly available
information, current security prices also reflect any type of information
market insiders have access to (i.e. private information), thus it is not
possible for market insiders to realize abnormal returns.
(Efficient market hypothesis)

despite the important role all three hypotheses play in economic and financial
market theory their rationale has been put into question when considering the
behavior of financial markets under the effect of phenomena such as market
speculation, herd behavior, and the psychological/emotional reaction of
financial markets to political and macroeconomic innovations. These phenomena
for instance have been observed to temporarily alter the market equilibrium for
security pricing, giving room to narrow time lapses (time periods during which
security markets correct themselves) of market inefficiency. It is in this
context where an analysis of efficiency becomes worth pursuing.
(Against Efficient market hypothesis)

We select major currencies from Europe and Japan for our model implementation
because they are some of the most traded worldwide and belong to some of the
largest economies that differ in underlying drivers of currency value (through
demand and supply of the currencies) such as economic structure (e.g.,
economies with larger financial and banking sectors tend to attract more
capital), volatility (e.g., economies with stronger currencies and exposed to
higher volatility: financial and political, tend to attract more currency
buyers and sellers) and, most importantly, trading profiles (import–export).
Hence, we would expect those currencies from economies with lower volatility,
stronger financial sectors, and higher trade surplus to be more efficient.
(Selection of the currencies)

**Economic and political effects on currency clustering dynamics**
Similar to other financial markets, exchange rates between different currencies
are determined by the laws of supply and demand in the forex market.
Additionally, market participants (financial institutions, traders, and
investors) consider macroeconomic factors such as interest rates and inflation
to assess the value of a currency. Central banks may participate in the forex
market as well, when pursuing their fiscal and monetary policy goals. The
degree of central bank interventions (CBIs) in the market determines the regime
in which a currency trades.
Some central banks peg their currency to another currency, using their assets
in the market to accomplish a fixed exchange rate. If a central bank does not
intervene, its currency is considered free-floating, meaning that the exchange
rate is mostly determined by market forces. Some central banks allow their
currency to float freely within a certain range, in a so-called managed float
regime.
(Central bank control)

The appreciation of one currency implies the depreciation of the currency
against which it is traded.
(Fx characteristic)

Qualitatively, we can distinguish between hard and soft currencies; hard
currencies are considered a store of value due to their stability even in
adverse global economic conditions, and soft currencies are more volatile, for
example due to deteriorating economic conditions in respective countries.
(Qualitatively description of currencies)

We can distinguish between reserve currencies, funding currencies, and
commodity currencies.
Reserve currencies are currencies which central banks typically hold as foreign
exchange reserves, for which they prefer hard currencies (USD, EUR, GBP).
Funding currencies are currencies which can be borrowed at low interest rates
(CHF, JPY).
Commodity currencies are currencies of countries whose economic output strongly
depends on the price of one or more commodities (NOK, AUD, CAD, NZD).

**The Returns to Currency Speculation in Emerging Markets**
Bid-ask spreads are two to four times larger in emerging markets than in
developed countries.
(Spread)

The bid-ask spreads for both the spot and forward market are much larger for
emerging markets than for developed economies. For developed countries, the
median bid-ask spread in the spot market was between 0.039 and 0.051 percent
depending on the sample period chosen, while the median spreads for one-week
and one-month forwards were in the range of 0.042-0.053 percent and 0.045-0.057
percent, respectively. We found the spreads to be between two and four times
larger for emerging market currencies than for developed country currencies.
(Spread values)

**Patterns in high-frequency FX data**
Throughout the paper we consider a simpler definition of the price given by
$$x_{i} = (bid_{i} + ask_{i} ) / 2$$
(Midpoint price definition)

In financial markets, the flow of time is discontinuous: over weekends trading
comes to a standstill or, inversely, at news announcements there are spurts of
market activity.
(Flow of time)

We use a tick-by-tick database composed of 13 currency pairs spanning five
years, from December 1, 2002 to December 1, 2007. The following currency pairs
are considered with the total number of ticks given in parenthesis: AUD-JPY
(15’286’858), AUD-USD (7’037’203), CHF-JPY (17’081’987), GBP-CHF (27’141’146),
GBP-JPY (26’423’199), GBP-USD (13’918’523), EUR-AUD (19’111’129), EUR-GBP
(13’847’688), EUR-CHF (9’912’921), EUR-JPY (22’594’396), EUR-USD (13’093’081),
USD-CHF (13’812’055), USD- JPY (13’507’173). The difference in the number of
ticks is due to varying liquidity and the fact that some exchange rates are
synthetically generated from two data streams, i.e., market makers quote prices
based on two feeds creating cross-rates. As an example, GBP-JPY is derived from
GBP-USD and USD-JPY. This, however, does not mean that the GBP-JPY data is
artificial as it is also real published market data. The approximately 26.5
million ticks in the GBP-JPY cross-rate are derived from the ticks in GBP-USD
(13.9 million) and USD-JPY (13.5 million).
(Data description)

**Information Flows in Foreign Exchange Markets**
The foreign exchange (FX) market is the largest financial market in the world,
with a daily trading volume of about five trillion U.S. dollars (USDs; Bank for
International Settlements (BIS, 2013)). Also, the FX market is largely
organized as an over-the-counter (OTC) market, meaning that there is no
centralized exchange and that market participants can have only partial
knowledge about the trades of other market participants and available liquidity
in different market segments. Hence, despite its size and sophistication, the
FX market is fairly opaque and decentralized because of its market structure
when compared to, for example, the major equity markets.
(Introduction to foreign exchange markets)

In centralized, exchange-based markets, there is a single price at any point in
time—the market price. In decentralized markets, by default, there is no
visible common price. The FX market is the largest market of this kind.
(Centralized and decentralized markets)

**Teaching the Bid-Ask Spread and Triangular Arbitrage**
The FX market is a decentralized or over-the-counter (OTC) market without
common trading floor. The FX market is open 24 hours a day. There are several
financial centers with different time zones in the world. When the trading of
one currency is closed at one financial center, it continues on the other
financial center with the different time zone. International banks serve as
dealers who make a market by standing ready to buy or sell foreign currencies
for their own accounts. The bid price represents the price a bank dealer is
willing to buy for a currency and the ask price is the price a bank dealer is
willing to sell for a currency. Therefore, bank clients buy at the ask price
from the dealer and sell at the bid price to the dealer. The bid-ask spread,
the difference between the ask price and the bid price, is the compensation
(transaction cost) to the dealer (bank clients). The bid-ask spread and bid-ask
relationship are basic parts of the FX market microstructure.
(Introduction to foreign exchange markets)

They find that bid-ask spreads increase when the FX volatility increases, and
they decrease when the dealer competition increases.
(Behavior of the spread)

Quote (tick-by-tick) data with bid and ask prices for GBP vs USD currency pair
are needed and they can be purchased from Tick Data, LLC. The trading of FX is
24 hours a day. The quote data from Tick Data are time stamped to the
millisecond (HH:MM:SS.mmm) and start at the first millisecond of 6 PM
(18:00:00.001) Eastern Time (ET) on Sunday and end at the last millisecond of
5:59 PM (17:59:59.999) ET on Friday for each week. So, Tick Data classifies
one-day 24- hour trading as 18:00:00.001 ET on the previous date to
17:59:59.999 ET on the current day. For example, the 24-hour trading time on
June 23, 2016 is from 18:00:00.001 ET on June 22, 2016 to 17:59:59.999 ET on
June 23, 2016.
(Data description)

The bid-ask spread can be computed as follows
$$s(t) = a(t) - b(t)$$
$$\% s(t) = \frac{a(t) - b(t)}{m(t)}$$
where $b(t)$ and $a(t)$ are bid price and ask price at time t and
$$m(t) = \frac{b(t) + a(t)}{2}$$
is the quoted midpoint at time t
(Spread definition)

**Foreign Exchange Market Structure, Players and Evolution**
Electronic trading has transformed foreign exchange markets over the past
decade, and the pace of innovation only accelerates. This formerly opaque
market is now fairly transparent and transaction costs are only a fraction of
their former level. Entirely new agents have joined the fray, including retail
and high-frequency traders, while foreign exchange trading volumes have
tripled. Market concentration among dealers has risen reflecting the heavy
investments in technology. Undeterred, some new non-bank market participants
have begun to make markets, challenging the traditional foreign exchange
dealers on their own turf.
(Changes in Forex markets)

It would be hard to overstate the importance of foreign exchange markets for
the world economy. They affect output and employment through real exchange
rates. They affect inflation through the cost of imports and commodity prices.
They affect international capital flows through the risks and returns of
different assets. Exchange rates are justifiably a major focus for
policymakers, the public, and of course the media.
(Importance of Forex markets)

the trading day begins when dealers arrive for work in Australia and Asia.
Activity then moves to Europe when markets open in Frankfurt, London, and
Paris, and finishes late in the afternoon in New York. As always, there is no
time during the day when the market formally closes, although there is a brief
lull in activity between about 19:00 and 22:00 GMT when most New York traders
have gone home and most Sydney traders are still on their way to work
(Forex description)

Most exchange rates are quoted to five significant digits, with the final (or
smallest) digit known as a "pip". A pip is short for Price Increment Point. In
EUR/USD, a one-pip change is e.g. from 1.2345 to 1.2346. In most major currency
pairs, one pip is roughly one basis point.
(Pip definition)

The vast majority of FX trading is essentially unregulated, in striking
contrast to the extensive regulations in most equity and bond markets. Some
well-known regulations in other asset markets are missing in FX markets. Their
absence is not a problem due to unique features of the FX market. Short-sales
restrictions, for example, though severe in most developed equity and bond
markets, cannot even be defined in this asset class because the sale of one
currency is simply the purchase of another. Other practices that are illegal
on most organised exchanges are discouraged in FX by market conventions and
best practices. For example, front-running of customer orders is widely
considered bad practice even though it is not illegal. 8 Fortunately, the FX
market is sufficiently liquid that significant manipulation by any single actor
is all but impossible during active trading hours for the major currencies.
(Regulations)

Since FX markets are subject to minimal regulation, they are also subject to
minimal reporting requirements, which explains the scarcity of aggregate data
on FX trading. Though equity trading volume is a staple on the evening news, on
any given day no one knows how much was traded in FX markets - not the
regulators, not the monetary authorities, not even the major FX dealers. The
only comprehensive information source is the Triennial Central Bank Survey of
Foreign Exchange Market Activity, a joint effort of central banks around the
world coordinated every third year in April by the Bank for International
Settlements (BIS). 9 In the absence of official sources of high-frequency data,
most research on currency trading relies on proprietary data from banks and
brokers.
(Forex data)

Interdealer trading can be carried out either directly in the over-the-counter
market or indirectly via FX limit-order markets run by FX brokers. In
over-the-counter markets, all trades take place through designated market
makers. In limit-order markets, no agents are specifically tasked with
providing liquidity. Every agent can either supply (“make”) liquidity by
placing a limit order, or demand (“take”) liquidity by entering a market order.
Limit orders indicate the prices at which an agent is willing to buy (bid) or
sell (offer/ask) a specific quantity. The set of outstanding limit orders,
which represents the existing liquidity supply, is known as the “limit order
book.” Orders remain in the limit order book until executed or cancelled. The
best bid or ask prices are known as “the quotes,” and the quantity available at
the quotes is the market’s “depth.” Trades occur when another dealer indicates
that s/he wishes to trade immediately by placing a “market order”. Market
orders are executed against limit orders in the book, beginning with the
best-priced limit order and, for large quantities, moving to limit orders with
successively less attractive prices.
(Interdealer trading - Order book)

Interdealer bid-ask spreads in the major currencies are typically 0.5 to 2.0
pips; those on less liquid currencies, particularly those with exchange
controls, can reach 40 pips. These spreads, like spreads in equity and bond
markets, are influenced by inventory risk, as indicated by the positive
cross-sectional relation between average spreads and average market volatility.
Nonetheless, the forces that drive FX interdealer spreads vary in striking ways
from those that drive equity and bond spreads. FX interdealer spreads are
highest during the short overnight period when trading is light and volatility
is low. By contrast, spreads in equity and bond markets are typically highest
at the market open, when trading and volatility are highest. This difference
has been traced to the absence of regulation – and specifically the absence of
formal opening and closing hours - in FX
(Spread)

**The electronic trading systems and bid-ask spreads in foreign exchange market**
Through the mid-1990s, the foreign exchange market was primarily reliant on
phone-based technology. In April 1992, the first electronic brokers system
(Reuters D2000-2) was introduced in the foreign exchange market. The second
major electronic system, EBS (Electronic Broking Services), was launched 1 year
later in September 1993. Although uptake of electronic broking was relatively
slow at first, by the late 1990s these platforms started to dominate interbank
trading flows. By most estimates, their combined market share now accounts for
about 90 percent of interbank trading in most major currency pairs.
(Electronic trading history)

Advantages of the electronic systems are obvious: lower operation costs, faster
and more accurate transaction processing, fewer geographical restrictions,
lower thresholds for market entry and higher market transparency.
(Advantages EBS)

In general, the EBS system reduces spreads significantly. Dealers with
information advantage tend to quote relatively wider spreads than small dealers
in electronic systems. Geographical differences in market liquidity are greatly
reduced through electronic trading. Finally, the effects mentioned above are
immediate and persistent.
(Effect of the introduction of EBS)

FX market differs from stock market. Spreads in the public NASDAQ market, which
started operating electronic systems in 1990, are found to be even wider than
competitive spreads in early 1990s. This due to the lack of effective
competition among dealers in the stock market. In contrast, competition among
dealers in the FX market is anything but lacking. This comparison tends to
suggest that the advantageous features of electronic systems do not
automatically lead to higher liquidity in the market. Instead, it is more
effective competition among dealers caused by electronic systems that reduces
transaction costs and raises market liquidity.
(Comparison between stock and forex markets)

Bid-ask spreads in financial markets are an indicator of the cost of trading
and providing the service of liquidity. Finance theories have identified three
basic sources of bid-ask spreads: order processing costs, inventory holding
risk, and information costs of market making. In addition, more recent market
microstructure theory, finds that strategic trading, i.e. dealers reducing
their quoted spreads to attract order flow and gain information advantage, also
contributes to spreads.
(Spread sources)

Electronic transaction data currently available, do not have dealer IDs
associated with each transaction. Real transaction data for years prior to 1992
are hardly available. Finally, transaction volume data are not available for
major currencies in all the existing data sources.
(Data characteristics)

**Microstructure effects, bid-ask spreads and volatility**
Prices move in discrete units. The exact size of these discrete units may be
imposed by a regulator or an exchange, or it may arise as a market convention.
Price discreteness is clearly important for bid–ask spreads because the minimum
price increment, or “tick size”, places a lower bound on the size of the
bid–ask spread. It also determines volatility since it determines the minimum
increment by which price can change.
(Price discrete units)

EBS provided the data for the present study, and this dataset that has not
previously been available to academic researchers. It contains spot FX quote
and trade price data for eight currency pairs from the EBS electronic
inter-dealer market. The quotes data comprises the best bid and ask quote
prices per second (Greenwich Mean Time (GMT)). Trade data is also time-stamped
to the nearest second (GMT). No information about the size of each transaction
is provided. Also, there are no identifiers of the parties to each trade.
(Data description)

The term ‘pip’ is commonly used in the foreign exchange market in place of the
word ‘tick’. It may be worth acknowledging the distinction that pips arise as a
matter of convention, whereas ticks are formally enforced, usually by an
exchange. However, in the present paper we use the two terms inter-changeably.
A pip usually refers to the incremental value in the fifth non-zero digit
position from the left. Note that it is not related to the position of the
decimal point. For example, one pip in a USD/JPY value of 113.57 would be 0.01,
while one pip for EUR/USD of 1.0434 would be 0.0001. The fact that the decimal
place does not occupy a fixed position necessitates the introduction of a
‘scaling factor’ with the purpose of bringing the pip to the left of the
decimal point. For example, the scaling factor for the USD/JPY is 100 and that
for the EUR/USD is 10,000.
(Pip)

The pip bid–ask spread is defined as:
$$pip = \left(ask−bid\right) \cdot scaling \, factor$$
The percentage bid–ask spread formula is:
$$\% bid−ask \, spread = \frac{ask−bid}{traded price} \cdot 100$$
(Method to compare bid-ask spreads)

**The global transmission of Volatility**
It is well known that the peak period of daily FX market activity occurs when
European and American trading overlap. Hence, price fluctuations during this
time period should be treated as an idiosyncratic activity block. The
Asia-Europe overlap, on the other hand, has been given little consideration in
the literature.
(Forex activity)

**Liquidity in the Foreign Exchange Market**
Over the last three decades, liquidity in equity and bond markets has been
studied extensively in the finance literature. 1 By contrast, the literature
has had little to say about liquidity in the foreign exchange (FX) market.
(Introduction)

In this paper, we investigate nine currency pairs in detail, namely, the
AUD/USD, EUR/CHF, EUR/GBP, EUR/JPY, EUR/USD, GBP/USD, USD/CAD, USD/CHF, and
USD/JPY exchange rates. For each exchange rate, we process the irregularly
spaced raw data to construct second-by-second price and volume series, each
containing 86,400 observations per day. For every second, the midpoint of best
bid and ask quotes or the transaction price of deals is used to construct
one-second log-returns. For the sake of interpretability, we multiply these FX
returns by 10,000 to obtain basis points (bps) as the unit of measurement.
(Data description)

measures how
much the exchange rate changes in response to a given order flow. The higher
the price impact, the more the exchange rate moves following a trade, reflecting
lower liquidity. Moreover, if a currency i